The following tape contains lessons one
through five of the conversational
Cherokee course prepared by the Cherokee
Bilingual Education Program. Each lesson
begins with a dialogue with each phrase
recorded seven times. Listen to the first
three repetitions and repeat after the
fourth, fifth, sixth, and seventh during
the pauses. Then continue with the drills
following the instructions provided in the
tape.
Conversational Cherokee Lesson 1.
Greetings. Hello John. OCO John. OCO John.
OCO John. OCO John. OCO John. OCO John.
Hello, Ann. !
How are you?
Tohitu. Tohitu.
Tohitu.
Fine.
Tohiku. Tohiku. Tohiku.
. .
And you?
Yes, fine.
additional vocabulary repetition
one he ah, where is son? he ah, where is
son? two he ah, ah ma? he ah, ah ma?
three Three.
Four.
Five.
Six. Six.
Six.
Question drill. You will hear the
question, what is this, in Cherokee, six
times. Give a one-word answer. using the
noun found in the corresponding six
sentences in the additional vocabulary
drill.
Three. Kada ushti hiya.
Aspala.
Four. Kada ushti hiya. Agaya.
Agaya. Five. Kada ushti hiya.
Six. .
Additional question, Dr. Elf. . . . . . .
. . . . .
additional question drill repetition in
this drill you'll hear a question with the
six nouns with each of the six nouns used
in the previous drills questioned that is
the question suffix will be attached to
these nouns. You will then hear the
answer. Repeat the answer, which will be
given twice.
Repeat. One. Where is that? Here. Ah,
where is that? Ah, where is that?
I gave you just a conversation at normal
speed do not repeat listen for
comprehension only Oh see you John we'll
see you all right Tohiku? Tohiku? Nah nah,
tohiku is... Ah, tohiku? End of lesson
one.
Lesson two, dialogue.
Hello. Hello? Hello?
Do you speak English? English. Your
negative on this. Your negative on this.
Your negative on this. Your negative on
this.
Your negative on this.
Your negative on this. Your negative on
this. Yes, I speak English well. All
right, home.
What is your name?
My name is Bill Brown. I am Bill Brown. I
am Bill Brown. I am Bill Brown. I am Bill
Brown. I am Bill Brown. I am Bill Brown. I
am Bill Brown. I am Bill
Brown. I am Bill
Brown. And you? What is your name?
one.
Any squirrel? On slowly, on slowly, on
slowly, on slowly, on slowly, on slowly.
Slowly. On slowly. Do you want water? I
musta dooly. I musta dooly. I musta dooly.
I musta dooly. I musta dooly. I musta
dooly. I musta dooly. Yes, I am thirsty
for water. Uh, I'm locked today. Uh, I'm
locked today. A mak tdegi. A mak tdegi. A
mak tdegi. A mak tdegi.
Here is water.
Thanks. Thanks. Wado. Wado. Wado. Wado.
Wado. Wado. Wado.
Additional vocabulary repetition. Repeat
after each phrase. One. One.
Two.
Three.
Kentucky yeah Kentucky for Yeah Yeah, Dana
Yeah, yeah, Dana. Yeah, yeah, Dana
Hi, yeah, good today
Yeah good today. Yeah good today
Six. Here, take two liner. Here, take two
liner. Here, take two liner.
Question drill. Listen to the question and
then give the answer. Model.
Is this a boy? Yes, it's a boy.
He asked, Ya ge?
Ya ge da?
Three. He asked, Kan toke?
Kan toke da? .
Five.
.
Six. Additional question, Daryl.
Model, what is this? A woman. Kada u
stihia? A gay ya?
A gay ya? A gay ya? After each question,
kada u stihia? Give the one word answer
which corresponds to the nouns in numbers
one through six. One.
Two.
Three.
kanto ki
four ya thay
na
five kar choday
Six.
Conversation at normal speed. Do not
repeat. Listen for comprehension only. tôi
joc cí  joyful recovery
cí ch react brackle my phone
softwarming listen
againø
I am Bill Brown dog with a name of the
Dota's a dog on slowly. I'm a chateau I'm
not today. I'm What?
End of lesson two
Conversational Cherokee lesson three
Dialogue with Mary and Charles. Hello,
Charles. Hello, Charles. Hello, Mary.
Hello Mary. .
What are you doing?
I'm working.
Doggy left stony.
Doggy left stony. What are you building?
Jathaga Unniyasthi Jathaga Unniyasthi
Jathaga Unniyasthi Jathaga
Unniyasthi Jathaga Unniyasthi
Jathaga Unniyasthi Jathaga Unniyasthi
Jathaga
Unniyasthi
Give me a hammer. Ganai velocity has
consumed. Ganai velocity has consumed.
Ganai velocity has consumed.
Ganai velocity has consumed. Can you see?
Can anyone who lost their hair, say
something?
Do you want any nails? What did I do? What
did I do? What did I do?
Yes, I want nails.
Here are a hammer and nails.
I have not done anything wrong.
Thanks. Thanks. What don't? What don't?
What don't? What don't? What don't? What
don't? What don't? What don't? What don't?
End of the dialogue.
Additional vocabulary drill. One. Bill is
working.
Bill is speaking. Bill is speaking.
Bill is speaking.
Bill is building a house. We got so the
honest game
We got so the honest game
For bill is thinking we are downtown
We are downtown
Five. Bill is helping.
Six.
Bill is sleeping. We'll go to sleep.
We'll go to sleep.
Question Drill You will hear the question,
What is Bill doing? six times. Give a one
-word answer using the verb found in the
corresponding numbers of the additional
vocabulary drill.
One.
. . .
.
How many are you doing?
I'm doing fine.
I'm doing fine. Five. How many are you
doing?
I'm doing fine.
I'm doing fine. Six.
How are you?
Dialogue at normal speed. Do not repeat.
Listen for comprehension only.
End of lesson three.
Thank you. Thank you.